Premchand is known to write about the life of common man and this bookalso deals with an issue that has been faced by many. Unlike all other worksalso deals with an issue that has been faced by many. Unlike all other worksof Premchand which were mainly focused on farmers or poor of Premchand which were mainly focused on farmers or poor people, Nirmalapeople, Nirmalais more of women centric and thus is more of women centric and thus does not touches those does not touches those areas. Prareas. Premchandemchandhas thrown light on the status of Indian women and how they are treated.has thrown light on the status of Indian women and how they are treated. The  The situation situation has has not not changed changed much much even even nownow. . Metropolitans Metropolitans might might bebee!ceptions but, in the interior of the country, in those villages, were thee!ceptions but, in the interior of the country, in those villages, were thema"ority of Indians are supposed to be residing, situation is the same. #romma"ority of Indians are supposed to be residing, situation is the same. #romthe very moment she is born, the burden of the very moment she is born, the burden of family and its respect falls on herfamily and its respect falls on hershoulder and she had to sacri$ce and compromise all through her life "ust toshoulder and she had to sacri$ce and compromise all through her life "ust tokeep her familys pride and honor.keep her familys pride and honor.Nirmala is the name of the central character of the novel. The book describesNirmala is the name of the central character of the novel. The book describesthe tragic story of her life. Through Nirmala Premchand has tried to depictthe tragic story of her life. Through Nirmala Premchand has tried to depictthe problems associated with the multiple marriages and how a step motherthe problems associated with the multiple marriages and how a step motheris being blamed for all the wrong things that happens and thus ultimatelyis being blamed for all the wrong things that happens and thus ultimatelylead to the destruction of a healthy rich family.lead to the destruction of a healthy rich family.Nirmalas marriage was about to happen to a doctor in a rich %rahmin familyNirmalas marriage was about to happen to a doctor in a rich %rahmin familybut because of the death of but because of the death of her father, a $nancial burden starts looming overher father, a $nancial burden starts looming overththe e NiNirmrmalalas as fafamimilyly. . ThThusus, , papayiying ng ththe e dodowrwry y bebecocomemes s a a coconcncerern. n. &e&errmarmarririage age thethen n haphappenpens s to to a a widwidoweower, r, MunMunshi shi TTotaotaram ram in in his his forfortytys s whowhobrings Nirmala home in order to $ll his $rst wifes place. &e has three sonsbrings Nirmala home in order to $ll his $rst wifes place. &e has three sonsand one sister living with him. &e is a lawyer and is rich and respected in theand one sister living with him. &e is a lawyer and is rich and respected in thesociety. %y marrying, he hopes that his children would get the love of asociety. %y marrying, he hopes that his children would get the love of amother and there would be someone to take care of his house too. &is lostmother and there would be someone to take care of his house too. &is losthopes to live comes alive. %ut Nirmala could not $nd her dream man in himhopes to live comes alive. %ut Nirmala could not $nd her dream man in himas he was too as he was too old for herold for her. 'ven then, she . 'ven then, she faked happiness in front of him.faked happiness in front of him.(oon suspecting the beauty of Nirmala, her husband starts doubting the(oon suspecting the beauty of Nirmala, her husband starts doubting therelationship between his eldest son and Nirmala and so relationship between his eldest son and Nirmala and so sends him to hostel.sends him to hostel.)ll )ll thrthree ee chichildrldren en reregrgret et thithis, s, espespecieciallally y the the eldeldest est oneone. . &is &is heahealth lth soosoonndeteriorates deteriorates in the in the hostel. ) hostel. ) catastrophes catastrophes strikes strikes the house the house of Nirof Nirmala. (hemala. (hewas now blamed for all that happened and the situation goes on to becomewas now blamed for all that happened and the situation goes on to becomefrom bad to worse. The story wonderfully depicts that how everybody getfrom bad to worse. The story wonderfully depicts that how everybody getcaught in the situation even though it is no ones fault.caught in the situation even though it is no ones fau